So, I've now read another book by
Sidarta Mukarji, if I'm pronouncing that
correctly. The Song of the Cell, an
exploration of medicine and the New
Human. Uh, this one came out in 2022.
The last book I read, the the Emperor of
All Malades, the the book about cancer,
came out in 2010. So, this one's uh way
more recent and way more up to-date,
which is really cool. And I kind of
enjoyed this one more, I think, because
it was more up to-date, but also just
the the subject matter. was sort of a
lot broader in sweep versus the emperor
of all males which was just all about
cancer. This one's uh this one's all
about cells but in talking about cells
it it it also talks about cancer but
about biology, genetics um and so much
stuff. This book is kind of a
combination of a biology textbook,
a sort of uh personal memoirs of a
doctor and a history of science or
history of medicine. history of medicine
and science. And yeah, again, he's a
great writer. He he's really good with
metaphors. Uh like the song of the cell,
his whole this whole book's I don't
think this is one of his stronger
metaphors, but it's the idea that the
cells have a song and a song is is is
something that is sort of exchanged or
sung together. And that sort of uh tells
about the interconnectedness of of cells
and how a cell is sort of the the basic
unit of life in and of itself. But a
cell becomes much more than that when
it's a multisellular organism that's all
working together and has this this song.
Also the the sort of idea of the new
human. He talks a lot about about how
the things we're we're doing, not just
sort of genetic engineering, but but but
all these these cellular therapies and
and and transplants and whatnot are
creating sort of new humans as it were.
I guess another way would say would be
unnatural or artificial not artificial
but unnatural humans which has really
negative connotations but like naturally
you're not going to get a bone marrow
transplant um to sort of if you need
like blood uh like red blood cells and
your body can't produce them like that's
not naturally going to happen. So you're
you're sort of a new human. It's not
that long. It's 300 and 300 and some
pages likeund and some pages worth of
notes. has some really cool
illustrations and drawings in it. Uh
like I said, it it goes through the
history of uh the discovery of the cell
discovery of organels, the discovery of
of the gene and and and uh and DNA and
and all kinds of stuff. So that's the
first part is the the discovery of the
cell and what what the cell is and and
um how all sort of diseases and pathogen
not pathogens all diseases and
pathologies are problems with cells. If
your body is not functioning properly,
it's because the cells themselves are
not functioning properly. And that's why
cell biology is so important in terms of
medicine
that if we can find out what's going
wrong with the individual cells then we
will cure the body. Part two talks about
the sort of uh the anatomy of the cell.
So organels, how the genome makes
proteins and proteins basically do
everything. uh talks about how cells
divide and in vitro fertilization
and mitosis meiosis and also about some
sort of early genetic engineering and
and cloning and stuff which is really
interesting. Part three was all about
blood. So blood uh as an organ of itself
and it there's the sort of three main
components to it. The platelets, the red
blood cells and the white blood cells.
So there's a lot of talk about immunity,
T- cells and B cells. how how the the
white blood cells can recognize self
versus non-self
and and how how uh how the immune system
will not attack the body and but in
times it does attack the body like when
there's something wrong and and how it
can distinguish between between self and
non-self which is really interesting.
Part four is uh on the pandemic. So,
like I said, this was written in 2022.
So, you can't have a book about medicine
and and and and scientific history and
and the cell without mentioning the CO
19 pandemic when you're right in the
middle of it. So, that was kind of
interesting to to to see uh a
physician's on the ground view of of the
the pandemic at that time. Part five is
about organs and how cells
differentiate. So all humans are made up
of cells but and they all have that same
genetic code. So like my DNA is is the
same say for like minor mutations um as
I've grown and aged but each of those
cells functions differently and is
differentiated and that's why why I can
have different organs and and and and be
a multisellular
very complex being. I to me the the the
the like it's so complex and it's so
amazing. But to me the thing that really
got me is how a a fertilized egg can go
from a single cell to a fully
differentiated human being. Like the the
growth from that cell to to an embryo.
Like there's
so so many different things that have to
go right and cells have to grow in a
certain way and and that sort of
predifferiation to differentiating.
Like it it makes sense for me for a baby
to grow into an adult because sort of
the differentiation has already
occurred. The the parts are all there,
the organs and everything are all there.
They just have to sort of get bigger.
But going from a single cell to the the
blastoyst to the the embryo that it's
just amazing to me that the formation of
the noto cord and the three layers of
the blastoyst and each of those three
layers will be like the the the endoderm
and the ectoerm and
that that really blows my mind. I mean,
cell biology is is so
so complex. Um, and it's it's kind of
hard to believe that it
or hard to to comprehend how it it got
to be so comp so so complicated from
like just naturally from sort of
nothing. I guess it does make sense over
time. And the final part is all about
stem cells and and how stem cells are
sort of undifferiated cells that can can
divide and become different types of
cells and how
researchers have been able to induce
flurry potency into into cells. How how
to turn a normal cell a differentiated
cell into a
into a stem cell. So sort of going back
and creating a cell that can then
differentiate into anything else. You
could take like a muscle cell, turn it
into a stem cell that could potentially
turn into a liver cell, which then could
turn back into a stem cell, then turn
into a neuron. Like
I don't I don't know. But the the
possibilities for for regeneration
just it borders on the science fiction
in my mind. Like this whole the whole
time I'm reading it, I'm thinking about
aging and why do we age and how come
it's like oh well our cells after multi
after dividing so many times they sort
of wear out and and stuff breaks down
and mutations occur. But the cell that
is in the cells from a person is it
omniscellular asula all cells come from
cells. So all the cells in a person came
from one fertilized cell that also came
from the sperm and an egg of two other
people that divided from from their
bodies which their bodies originally
came from two cells. So
generations and generations of people
are all the same cells just dividing and
dividing and dividing and yes there is
the the mixing of the genome but the
cell itself maybe it is the mixing of
the genome
at conception that somehow resets the
aging process. I don't know. I just
think cells if cells can be immortal in
that
when they keep dividing
what's the sort of the ship of thesis if
a cell divides are the two daughter
cells the same cells the parent cell I
mean the fact that we call them daughter
cells and parent cells indicate that
they're not but in reality it's not a
parent cell creates two daughter cells
and then dies it's the parent cell
splits in two and then we have two cells
so why does that process eventually
break down and why body's age.
But
like is it a is it a stem cell thing
that this the stem cells which are the
bodies that can help rejuvenate us, they
sort of die out over time and it's just
the gametes that
that uh
survive
long enough to produce more gameamtes in
the next generation. I don't know.
It does kind of excite and worry me that
um sort of the the fountain of youth,
the the elixir of immortality that it
might be scientifically possible to stop
aging at some point. Probably not in my
lifetime, but
uh just politically, I worry that when
that happens, it's not going to be a
democratic everybody can live forever.
It's going to be very uh anti-aging
technology would be very um very
controlled and would be the purview of
the rich and powerful but who knows. And
anyways, the last part also talks about
uh cancer and sort of the the the cell
biology of of cancer cells because of
course the the author is an oncologist.
a great a great book, a great sort of
refresher if you if you took biology in
high school and talking about the
different parts of the cell and the the
mitochondria being the powerhouse of the
cell and and whatnot. Yeah, The Song of
the Cell. Really highly recommend a
great book if you if you want an
introduction into into the sort of the
weird
crazy complex biology of of ourselves.